Handicap schemes supported by HalSail

HalSail supports any handicap scheme that uses a Time Correction Coefficient (TCC) (sometimes called a Time Correction Factor) to convert elapsed times into corrected times. Such schemes are often known as time-on-time handicapping. The only difference between them is the degree of precision in the numbers and way they are displayed.

In the majority of cases (e.g. IRC and ORC) the handicap is displayed as a number given to 3 decimal places (e.g. 0.965). In that case the faster the boat the higher the number.

In some cases the handicap is given as a reciprocal, so that the faster the boat the lower the number. For instance in the RYA's Portsmouth Yardstick scheme and in its YTC scheme the handicap is given as 1000/TCC, so that a boat with a number of 1050 has a TCC of 0.952

In other cases, for instance in CYCA, the handicap is given as the number of minutes allowed per hour sailed.

The following handicap schemes are commonly used in HalSail. The ones in red are progressive schemes, sometimes known as golf schemes, where the handicap of each boat is modified after each race, depending on its performance.

Level  Fleet racing
ASY  Australian Sailing Yardsticks (ex VYC)
CYCA Clyde Yacht Clubs' Association
ECHO Irish Sailing handicaps for cruisers
IHS  Island Handicap System from the Channel Islands
IRC  International Racing Certificate
NHC  National Handicap scheme for Cruisers from the UK's Royal Yachting Association
ORC  Offshore Racing Congress including the Triple Number System
PHRF Performance Handicap Racing Fleet from North America.
PY   Portsmouth Yardstick from the UK's Royal Yachting Association.
Small Cat Small Catamaran Handicap Rating System
YTC YTC from the Royal Yachting Association.

In addition there is a generic scheme:

TCF Plain time correction factor given to 4 decimal places

Note that you can give a local name to any of the above schemes when you apply it to a particular racing class (fleet). You might have a class that sails under PY numbers that you have modified to suit your own conditions and call the scheme "Club Handicaps", for instance.
